NETOBSERV-1322: ACM & netobserv metrics (#61)
netobserv/documents: blogs/acm/leverage-metrics-in-acm.md

#### Pre-requisites

- A running OpenShift[*] cluster, configured as a hub with RHACM. The full documentation is [here](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_advanced_cluster_management_for_kubernetes/2.9/html/install/installing), but for the purpose of this blog I am simply installing the "Advanced Cluster Management for Kubernetes" operator from console Operator Hub, with the default `MultiClusterHub` resource.
- Other clusters imported in RHACM. To do this, you are well guided when using the OpenShift Console, after selecting "All Clusters" in the top-left dropdown list.
- NetObserv operator installed and configured on each cluster to monitor. This can also be done entirely from the OpenShift Console, via OperatorHub, or even better, directly piloted via RHACM policies. We [provide some templates](https://github.com/netobserv/documents/tree/main/examples/ACM/policies) that you can install on the hub cluster. If you choose to use them, NetObserv install is triggered by adding a label `netobserv=true` on clusters; but be aware that at the time of writing, it does not cover installing Loki, which means you don't get full-featured NetObserv.

> _*: nothing should stop you from doing the same with other Kubernetes flavours, but this blog will focus on OpenShift as it contains a few references to the OpenShift Console, and assumes Prometheus-based monitoring is set up on each cluster like is provided out of the box with OpenShift._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_*: nothing should stop you from doing the same with other Kubernetes flavors, but this blog will focus on OpenShift as it contains a few references to the OpenShift Console, and assumes Prometheus-based monitoring is set up on each cluster like is provided out of the box with OpenShift._
```

#### Configure NetObserv metrics

By default, NetObserv will configure a small set of metrics, namely:
- `namespace_flows_total`
- `node_ingress_bytes_total`
- `workload_ingress_bytes_total`

For the purpose of this article, we will enable more of them. Note that enabling more metrics may have a noticeable impact on Prometheus. You should monitor Prometheus resource usage when doing so.

If you're running NetObserv 1.4.x or older, edit the `FlowCollector` resource, find property `spec.processor.metrics.ignoreTags` and remove `egress` and `packets`.

If you're running NetObserv 1.5 or above, edit the `FlowCollector` resource, find property `spec.processor.metrics.includeList` and set it up with:
- `namespace_flows_total`
- `node_ingress_bytes_total`
- `workload_ingress_bytes_total`
- `workload_egress_bytes_total`
- `workload_egress_packets_total`
- `workload_ingress_packets_total`

This adds metrics used in later steps. [Take a look](https://github.com/netobserv/network-observability-operator/blob/main/docs/Metrics.md) at the available metrics if you want to customize this setup further.

> If you are only interested in metrics, you don't need to install and enable Loki. Read more about that [here](https://cloud.redhat.com/blog/deploying-network-observability-without-loki-an-example-with-clickhouse). But while NetObserv doesn't provide at the moment an out-of-the-box experience for viewing multi-cluster logs from Loki, these flow logs are still the most detailed and accurate data available when it comes to troubleshooting the network per cluster, providing a finer insight than metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are only interested in metrics, you don't need to install and enable Loki. Read more about that [here](https://cloud.redhat.com/blog/deploying-network-observability-without-loki-an-example-with-clickhouse). But while NetObserv doesn't currently provide an out-of-the-box experience for viewing multi-cluster logs from Loki, these flow logs are still the most detailed and accurate data available when it comes to troubleshooting the network per cluster, providing a finer insight than metrics.
```

Said differently:

- Metrics are the best for wide angle, aggregated view: ideal for a multi-cluster single pane of glass.

> - Flow logs are the best for zoomed-in, detailed views: ideal for in-cluster deep dive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Flow logs are the best for zoomed-in, detailed views: ideal for an in-cluster deep dive.
```

#### Start the observability add-on

> If you have already observability configured in RHACM, you can skip this section.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you already have observability configured in RHACM, you can skip this section.
```

    # Workloads
    - record: workload:netobserv_workload_egress_bytes_total:src:rate5m
      expr: sum(label_replace(label_replace(label_replace(rate(netobserv_workload_egress_bytes_total[5m]),\"namespace\",\"$1\",\"SrcK8S_Namespace\",\"(.*)\"),\"workload\",\"$1\",\"SrcK8S_OwnerName\",\"(.*)\"),\"kind\",\"$1\",\"SrcK8S_OwnerType\",\"(.*)\")) by (namespace,workload,kind)
    - record: workload:netobserv_workload_ingress_bytes_total:dst:rate5m
      expr: sum(label_replace(label_replace(label_replace(rate(netobserv_workload_ingress_bytes_total[5m]),\"namespace\",\"$1\",\"DstK8S_Namespace\",\"(.*)\"),\"workload\",\"$1\",\"DstK8S_OwnerName\",\"(.*)\"),\"kind\",\"$1\",\"DstK8S_OwnerType\",\"(.*)\")) by (namespace,workload,kind)
```

Let's take a break here: what are we doing?

This is defining a bunch of [Prometheus recording rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/#rule).

RHACM offers two options for pulling custom metrics from the managed clusters:

- By declaring metric names to pull
- Or by declaring such recording rules

> The former is easier to configure but in many cases, this is probably not what you want. When pulling metrics from many sources, the key concept to have in mind is [metrics cardinality](https://www.robustperception.io/cardinality-is-key/). The more metrics you configure, the bigger is the impact on Prometheus and Thanos resource usage and performance. "Cardinality" here does not refer to the number of record rules or names that we declare in this configuration - these are called _metric families_ - after all, if you look closely, we only mention four distinct metric families in this config, which isn't a lot. No, what really matters with cardinality is the distinct count of all metric families _and all their combinations of label keys and values_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The former is easier to configure but in many cases, this is probably not what you want. When pulling metrics from many sources, the key concept to have in mind is [metrics cardinality](https://www.robustperception.io/cardinality-is-key/). The more metrics you configure, the bigger the impact on Prometheus and Thanos resource usage and performance. "Cardinality" here does not refer to the number of record rules or names that we declare in this configuration - these are called _metric families_ - after all, if you look closely, we only mention four distinct metric families in this config, which isn't a lot. What really matters with cardinality is the distinct count of all metric families _and all their combinations of label keys and values_.
```

End of the break, let's continue with our setup.

Create this `ConfigMap` in your hub cluster - the one where the RHACM operator is installed:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/netobserv/documents/main/examples/ACM/netobserv-metrics.yaml
# TODO: remove before merging
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jotak/netobserv-documents/acm/examples/ACM/netobserv-metrics.yaml
```

Note that, if you are using the NetObserv upstream (community) operator, metrics are only available as "user workload metrics", and the procedure to configure RHACM observability then differs a little bit: the `ConfigMap` must be deployed in a different namespace, and the file key must be `uwl_metrics_list.yaml`. More information [here](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_advanced_cluster_management_for_kubernetes/2.9/html/observability/customizing-observability#adding-user-workload-metrics).

> This config will be immediately picked up by the metrics collector. To make sure everything worked correctly, you can take a look at these logs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This config is immediately picked up by the metrics collector. To make sure everything worked correctly, you can take a look at these logs:
```

_Clusters overall in/out stats and top namespaces_

![Clusters external](./images/overview-2.png)
_Clusters in/out external traffic_

2. NetObserv / Per Cluster

![Namespaces charts](./images/per-cluster-1.png)
_Top namespaces charts_

![Namespaces and Workloads tables](./images/per-cluster-2.png)
_Namespaces and Workloads tables_

These dashboards provide high level views on cluster metrics. To dive more in the details, such as for troubleshooting or performance analysis, it is still preferable to use the NetObserv plugin or metrics on a given cluster, via the OpenShift Console: not only the metrics are more accurate there, with less aggregation and a better resolution, but there are also more details available in the raw flow logs that aren't visible in metrics, such as pod/port/IP/interface information per flow and accurate timestamps.

#### It's on you

You can customize these dashboards or create new ones. [This documentation](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_advanced_cluster_management_for_kubernetes/2.9/html/observability/using-observability#setting-up-the-grafana-developer-instance) will guide you through the steps of creating your own dashboards.

> For instance, do you want to track workloads having external traffic, which we haven't done in this article (we did only for namespaces)? You can just adapt the rules defined above. If you look at them closely, you'll notice they're all really using the same four metrics under the cover: `netobserv_workload_egress_bytes_total`, `netobserv_workload_ingress_bytes_total` and their equivalent for packets. To track per-workload external traffic, we can use them again, and as for namespaces, filter on empty `SrcK8S_OwnerType` or `DstK8S_OwnerType`. This trick stands for: NetObserv hasn't been able to identify any in-cluster resource corresponding to this source or destination, so this is likely a cluster-external caller or service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, do you want to track workloads having external traffic, which we haven't done in this blog (we did only for namespaces)? You can just adapt the rules defined above. If you look at them closely, you'll notice they're all really using the same four metrics under the cover: `netobserv_workload_egress_bytes_total`, `netobserv_workload_ingress_bytes_total` and their equivalent for packets. To track per-workload external traffic, we can use them again, and as for namespaces, filter on empty `SrcK8S_OwnerType` or `DstK8S_OwnerType`. This trick stands for: NetObserv hasn't been able to identify any in-cluster resource corresponding to this source or destination, so this is likely a cluster-external caller or service.
```
